=== PAGE 1 ===
SYLLABUS & WEIGHTAGE OF 
QUESTIONS FOR COMPUTER BASED 
TEST 
 ADVERTISEMENT No: 12/2026/CHQ/DR-CBT 
 
MANAGER (ENGG.-ELECTRICAL) 
 
Part-A 
General Knowledge, General Intelligence,                                               Weightage 30% 
General Aptitude, English etc. 
 
Part-B 
Questions on subjects relating to                                                                Weightage 70% 
Educational Qualifications 
 
1.        Circuit Theory: Circuit components; network graphs; KCL, KVL; circuit analysis methods; 
nodal analysis, mesh analysis; basic network theorems and applications; transient analysis; RL, RC and 
RLC circuits; sinusoidal steady state analysis; resonant circui ts; coupled circuits; balanced 3-phase 
circuits; Two-port networks. 
2 .        S i g n a l s  a n d  s y s t e m s: Representation of continuous a nd discrete time signals; shift ing and 
scaling operation; liner time invariant and causal systems; Fourier Laplace and Z transform. 
3.    Instrumentation:  Insulation megger, earth megger, Kelvin’s Double bridge, Quadra nt 
electrometer, Rotating substandard, TOD meter. 
4.    Electrical Machines:- 
 
a. Transformers: Constructional details – Principle of operation – vector diagra ms on no load 
and load-regulation and efficiency – equivalent circuits and te sts for the determination of 
parameters of equivalent circuits – types of three phase transf ormers and their applications – 
Scott connection of transformers. 
b. 3-Phase Induction Motors: Principle of operation – Cage and Slip ring motors – torque sli p 
characteristics – methods of speed control. 
c.  3-Phase Alternators: Principle of operation and constructional details – types of Al ternators 
– synchronous impedance – voltage regulation – short circuit ra tio and its importance – 
phasor diagrams of round rotor and salient pole machines – sync hronization – behaviour of 
an alternator connected to infinite bus – effect of varying exc itation current and mechanical 
torque – power angle curves – control of active and reactive po wers. 
d. 3-Phase Synchronous Motors: Principle of operation – torque developed and methods of 
starting – V and Inverted V curves – effects of variations of e xcitation – synchronous 
condensers. 
5.         Single phase Induction Motors – Types of single phase motors – Types of Single phase 
induction motors – characteristics and methods of starting – shaded pole induction motor. 
6. Transmission  &  Distribution:  Line constants – Inductance and Capacitance calculations – 

=== PAGE 2 ===
Representation of overhead Lines – Short, Medium and Long lines – ABCD constants – Mechanical Design 
– Seg. Tension Calculations, Tuned Power Lines. 
a.  Over Head Line Insulators : Types of Insulators – Potential distributions over a string o f 
suspensions insulators – string efficiency – Methods of improvi ng string efficiency. 
b. Cable : Insulation of cables – Grading of cables – Capacitance Measurement in cables – Testing of 
Cables – Power frequency withstand tests. 
c. Fault Calculations: Balanced Fault calculations on systems – Symmetrical components – Types 
of faults – Analysis of unbalanced faults. 
d. Protection: Characteristic of Relays – Over current, directional and distan ce protection of 
lines. 
Protection of Alternators against stator faults, rotor faults, loss of excitation, unbalanced 
loading, overloading, failure of prime-mover. Over speeding and  over voltage. Protection of 
transformers against winding faults, overloads and external short circuits. 
e.  Circuit Breakers: Air- blast, oil, minimum oil, vacuum – Sulphur hexafluoride and 
d.c. circuit breakers – Relative merits and demerits. 
 
7. Power System Protection : Principles of over current, differential and distance protect ion, Concept 
of solid-state relays. Circuit breakers. Computer aided protect ion: Introduction; line bus, generator, 
transformer protection; numeric relays and application of DSP to protection. 
 
8. Microprocessors and Microcomputers : PC organization; CPU, instruction set, register set, timing 
diagram, programming, interrupts, memory interfacing, I/O inter facing, programmable peripheral 
devices. 
9. Analog and Digital Electronics : Characteristics of diodes. BJT, MOSFET, amplifiers – biasing,  
equivalent circuit and frequency response; oscillators and feed back amplifiers; operational amplifiers – 
characteristics and applications; simple active filters: VCOs a nd timers; combinational and sequential 
logic circuits; multiplexer; Schmitt trigger; multivibrators; s ample and hold circuits; A/D and D/A 
converters; 8-bit microprocessor basics, architecture, programming and interfacing. 
10. Power Electronics and Drives : Semiconductor power diodes, transistors thyristors, triacs, G TOs, 
MOSFETs and IGBTs – static characteristics and principles of op eration; triggering circuits; phase 
control rectifiers; bride converters – fully controlled and hal f controlled; principles of choppers and 
inverters; basic concepts of adjustable speed dc and ac drives.  
11. Fiber Optic Systems Multiplexing : Time division multiplexing, frequency division multiplexing, 
optical properties of materials, refractive index absorption an d emission of light, optical fibers lasers 
and optoelectronics materials, fiber optic lines. 
12. Digital Communication : Pulse code modulation (PCM), differential pulse code modulati on 
(DPCM), delta modulation (DM), Digital modulation and demodulat ion schemes: amplitude, phase 
and frequency keying schemes (ASK, PSK, FSK). Error control cod ing: error detection and 
correction, linear block codes, convolution codes. Information measure and source coding. Data 
networks, 7-layer architecture 
13. Fundamentals of HVAC System and Various types of Air-conditioning equipment- 
 Heating Plant- (Boilers/ Hot Water Generators) 
 Central Air-conditioning – (Chillers-Centrifugal/Screw) 
 VRV System, Precision Air conditioning 
 Unitary A/c- window/split/cassette/Tower 
 AHU, Cooling tower. 

=== PAGE 3 ===
14. PUMPS 
 
a. PUMPS: Water lifting devices, classification of pimps, centrifugal p ump and its 
characteristics, specific speed, NPSH and cavitation, selection  of pumps. 
b. H Y D R A U L I C S  A N D  F L U I D  M E C H A N I C S: Definition and properties of fluids. Units of 
measurement, kinematics of fluid flow, Bernoulli’s equation and  Euler’s equation of motion. 
Dimensional analysis and similitude. Laminar and turbulent flow . General equation for head 
loss in pipes; open channel flow, hydraulic jump; Measurement o f discharge in pipes and open 
channels. 
15. Renewable energy sources i/c Solar power plant & its statutory guidelines. 
 
ADDITIONAL TOPICS 
 
1. Contract Management: 
 Planning i/c estimation, tendering, execution, commissioning & operationalization. 
 Project Planning, Scheduling & monitoring: Work breakdown structure, milestones, bar charts 
and critical path method basics. 
 Execution of Electrical Works: Installation of MEP equipment, S ite management, manpower 
planning, quality control, inspection procedures. 
 Maintenance & Inventory management: Breakdown & Preventive Main tenance of MEP 
equipment i.e schedule, standard practice & maintaining records & electrical store. 
 Understanding about Electrical safety codes i.e NBC, IS / IEC S tandards, IE rules, Fire & 
safety norms, Environment norms and best practices etc 
2. Sub-station 
(i) HT Panels 
 HT overhead Lines 
 HT cables  
(ii) Transformers 
 LT panels, LT Cables 
 Bus Duct, Capacitor panels  
 Cable Trench, Cable Tray  
3. DG Sets/UPS 
   AMF Panel 
   Synchronization 
   SCADA & Power supply Management System 
4. Lifts / Escalators 
5. BMS/IBMS/EMS 
Building Management System 
Energy Management System 
6. Energy Conservation Measurers 
7. Water Supply 
Pumps Sets 
STP (Sewage Treatment Plant) 
WTP (Water Treatment Plant), RO Plant 
8. Fire Alarm & Fire Fighting System 

=== PAGE 4 ===
Fire Alarm & Detection 
Wet Riser 
Down Comer 
Sprinkler System 
Fire Suppression System 
9. Internal & External Electrification 
Wiring 
Conduiting 
Fitting/Fixtures 
Fans 
Pole (Street Light) 
High Mast Tower 
10. Earthing & Lighting Protection System 
 
11. CCTV / PA System 
 
***** 
 

